**2.8 Duality and Sensitivity Analysis**

When making an economic interpretation of the objective function of a linear programming problem, an alternative and useful point of view is obtained by computing the collective contributions of all the resources. If we multiply the original availability of each resource (shown in the original tableau) by its marginal worth (taken from the final tableau), and form the sum, we obtain precisely the optimal objective function value. In our example at the beginning of Section 2.5, we have marginal worth values of 0, 1, and 4, and resource availabilities of 150, 250, and 500; therefore, the optimal objective function value can be expressed as

 $$z^* = 0(150) + 1(250) + 4(500) = 2250$$

This apparently equivalent way of viewing the original (or **primal**) linear programming problem is a manifestation of what is called the **dual problem**. The study of duality provides the theoretical foundation for practical analysis of optimal solutions obtained with the Simplex method. This topic is especially important because the full and effective use of many linear programming software implementations requires a familiarity with the concepts of duality.

**Sensitivity analysis** is the study of how a solution to a problem changes when there are slight changes in the problem parameters, without solving the whole problem again from scratch. It is, therefore, an analysis of how sensitive a solution is to small perturbations in the problem data. Objective function coefficients, constraint coefficients, and resource capacities are problem data that may be difficult or costly to obtain. These values may be introduced into the linear programming model as rough estimates or imperfect observations, and they might be values that change over time, as costs fluctuate or resources availabilities vary.

If all problem data were certain and constant over time, there would be no need for sensitivity analysis. Each new problem would be based on exact data, and the solution would be a perfect one. In practice, such is rarely the case. Thus, the problem formulation that is solved initially may not be exactly the right problem, that is, the one that is valid at the time resources are actually procured, costs are incurred, or profits are made.

If it could be determined, through the process of sensitivity analysis, which of the problem parameters are the most critical to the optimality of the original problem solution, then analysts could take greatest care in supplying and refining specifically those parameters to which the solution is most sensitive. Sensitivity analysis tools are of great value to management because they can help to provide a thorough understanding of a problem solution, the range of problem parameters over which a solution is valid, and how the solution can be changed by making changes in costs, profits, or resource availability. Duality theory provides the foundation underlying these tools.