# 2.11 Illustrative Applications

## 2.11.1 Forest Pest Control Program (Rumpf et al. 1985)

The Maine Forest Service operates a program of aerial pesticide spraying to mitigate the destruction of spruce-fir forests by the spruce budworm. Yearly spraying of the 5  million acre infestation takes place in early summer during a specific stage of insect development, and must be done in dry weather under moderate wind conditions. Spraying is done by aircraft teams consisting of a spray aircraft, a guide plane with a pilot and navigator, and a monitor plane with a pilot and observer. The entire program includes analysis of insect damage and danger assessment of treatment requirements, and cost of chemicals, but one third of the total cost of the program is for aircraft and crews. The Forest Service has therefore wisely investigated the use of quantitative methods to maximize the efficiency of aircraft assignments and to reduce aircraft needs. <br> 
The aircraft operate out of eight airfields, and preliminary models were developed to partition the infested area into over 300 regions (spray blocks) about each airfield, and to then assign spray blocks to airfields and aircraft to airfields. <br> 
This initially seemed like a natural problem to be formulated as a network problem or integer programming model (see **Chapters 3** and **4**); but some of the realistic elements of this problem could not be incorporated into the network models, and the integer programming formulation turned out to be prohibitively large. Finally, a linear programming formulation was developed that models the problem realistically and that can be solved quite efficiently. <br> 
The decision variables are the times allocated to each aircraft team flying out of each airfield to spray each block. The objective function includes only those variables associated with allowable combinations of blocks, aircraft, and airfields; that is, blocks within operating range of the airfield, aircraft capable of spraying the type of pesticide prescribed for a certain block, and the specified type of aircraft team (planes and crew) stationed at the given airfield. The aim is to minimize total spraying cost. <br> 
Constraints are imposed to guarantee sufficient time to completely spray each block (and this depends on the geometrical shape of the block, the speed of the aircraft, the pesticide capacity of the plane, and the availability of chemicals at the airfield). A second category of constraints accounts for the time windows during which weather conditions and budworm development are appropriate for effective aerial spray. <br> 
The use of this model has saved time and reduced the cost of the aerial spraying program. It has also provided a framework from which to analyze major modifications to the program, such as loss of an airfield or the availability of a new long-range aircraft, and, in response to environmental concerns, to re-evaluate the actual need for spraying certain areas.