# 2.11.2 Aircraft and Munitions Procurement (Might 1987)

The US Air Force uses a linear programming model to decide annually how much of its procurement budget should be spent on various different aircraft (such as the F-16, A-10, F-111, and F-15E) and on various conventional munitions. It has been argued that quantitative methods are inapplicable for strategic decisions that are highly unstructured. However, senior level decision makers are rotated frequently and often lack long experience and judgment on which to base procurement decisions. For this reason, quantitative analytical decision support has proved to be of great benefit. <br>
The decision involves analyzing the cost-effectiveness of each aircraft carrying each of several possible munitions. The difficulty arises because the attrition of the aircraft is dependent on the munitions being delivered, and an aircraft may be vulnerable to different types of attack, depending on the weapon it is carrying. Likewise, an aircraft must fly at different altitudes with different munitions and thus anti-aircraft weapons vary in ffectiveness. And when the loss rate varies only a few percent, there is considerable variation in the number of attacks an aircraft can make during a conflict; thus, the cost-effectiveness of an aircraft-munitions combination is difficult to measure subjectively. <br>
The data used by the linear program include: 
<ul />

• The effectiveness of each aircraft munitions combination against each target type in each of six different weather conditions  <br>
• The attrition (probability of loss) of each aircraft for each aforementioned condition <br>
• The number of munitions delivered on each sortie for each condition <br>
• The number of sorties per day for each aircraft munitions combination <br>
• Current inventory of aircraft and munitions <br>
• Number and value of each type of target <br>
• Cost of each new aircraft and munitions type <br>

</ul>
 <br>
Thus, the decision variables are the total number of sorties flown by each aircraft munitions combination against each target type in each of six types of weather. The objective is the sum of these variables, each multiplied by the probability of a successful sortie times the value of the target type. <br>
Five categories of constraints are defined for aircraft, munitions, targets, weather, and budget. The current implementation has pre- and post-processors for data formatting, and can be run with different databases. Output includes listings, tables, and graphical displays indicating, for example, trade-offs of funds expended on aircraft versus munitions, target value destroyed versus expenditure on individual munitions or a mixture of munitions. This linear programming approach to procurement has received enthusiastic acceptance within the military procurement community.