# 2.7.1 Multiple Optimal Solutions

Recall from our example in **Section 2.3.3** that when the line corresponding to the objective function is parallel to one of the straight lines bounding the feasible region, then the objective function can be optimized at all points on that edge of the feasible region. Thus, instead of a unique optimal solution, we have infinitely many optimal solutions from which to choose, thereby permitting management to select on the basis of secondary factors that do not appear in the model.

This situation can be recognized in the Simplex tableau during Step 2 of the Simplex algorithm. If a zero appears in the objective function row corresponding to a non-basic variable, then that non-basic variable can enter the basis without changing the value of the objective function. In other words, there are two distinct **adjacent extreme points** that yield the same value of $z$.

When we apply the Simplex algorithm to the problem illustrated in **Figure 2.3**, the initial solution is $x_1$ = $x_2$ = 0. In the first iteration, $x₂$ enters the basis and $s_1$ leaves, and this solution $x_1$ = 0, $x_2$ = 2 yields $z$ = 4. Next, $x_1$ enters the basis and $s_2$ leaves, and we obtain the solution designated as point A in the figure where $x_1$ = 4/3, $x_2$ = 10/3, and $z$ = 8. (Observe that $s_3$ is a basic variable and, therefore, constraint 3 is not *binding* at this point.) Now, the third Simplex tableau is as follows.


|     | $z$ | $x₁$  | $x₂$  | $s₁$  | $s₂$  | $s₃$  | Solution |
|-----|---|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|----------|
| $z$   | 1 | 0   | 0   | 0   | 1   | 0   | 8        |
| $x₂$  | 0 | 0   | 1   | 1/3 | 1/3 | 0   | 10/3     |
| $x₁$  | 0 | 1   | 0   | -2/3| 1/3 | 0   | 4/3      |
| $s₃$  | 0 | 0   | 0   | 2/3 | -1/3| 1   | 14/3     |


This solution is optimal since all elements on the top row are non-negative. The zero in the top row corresponding to the non-basic variable $s_1$ signals that this problem has multiple optimal solutions. And, in fact, if we apply another pivot operation (by bringing $s_1$ into the basis and selecting $s_3$ to leave the basis), we obtain the fourth tableau

|     | $z$ | $x₁$ | $x₂$ | $s₁$ | $s₂$  | $s₃$  | Solution |
|-----|---|----|----|----|-----|-----|----------|
| $z$   | 1 | 0  | 0  | 0  | 1   | 0   | 8        |
| $x₂$  | 0 | 0  | 1  | 0  | 1/2 | -1/2| 1        |
| $x₁$  | 0 | 1  | 0  | 0  | 0   | 1   | 6        |
| $s₁$  | 0 | 0  | 0  | 1  | -1/2| 3/2 | 7        |


This solution corresponds to point B in *Figure 2.3* where $x_1$ = 6, $x_2$ = 1, and $z$ = 8; and where $s_1$ is basic and consequently constraint 1 is not binding at this point.
