# 2.10.3 Software for Solving Linear Programming


The Simplex method is theoretically not an efficient algorithm because its worst case performance is exponential in the size of the problem being solved. However, empirical evidence, observed over many years and many practical problem instances, shows the Simplex method to be consistently very efficient in practice. <br> 
The computational effort required for solving a linear program with the Simplex method is strongly dependent on the number of constraints $m$, and almost independent of the number of variables $n$. In typical problems, we find that the number of constraints is much less than the number of variables, and in just such cases, the Revised Simplex has great computational advantage over the standard Simplex. In practical experience, the number of Simplex iterations required, on average, to solve a problem with $m$ constraints, is $2m$. A practical, although not strict, upper bound on the number of iterations is $2(m + n)$ (Ravindran et al. 1987). Total computation time has been observed to increase roughly in the order of $m^3$. <br> 
Thus, a 1000-constraint problem may require a million times as much computation time as a 10-constraint problem. In practice, we can generally expect to obtain solutions to linear programming problems very efficiently, despite the lack of any attractive performance guarantees. <br> 
To give some perspective to the notion of **problem size** (and to dispel any misperceptions that may have been created by the very small illustrative examples used earlier in this chapter), we should indicate just what is considered a *large* linear programming problem. Problem size is usually expressed in terms of the number of constraints, the number of decision variables (which may or may not include the slack and surplus variables), and perhaps the number of non-zero coefficients in the matrix. In the early 1950s, when the first linear programming software was being developed, an inversion of a matrix of order 100 was considered state of the art in numerical computation. Nowadays, a linear programming problem with thousands of constraints is routine, and problems with tens to hundreds of thousands of constraints are computationally manageable. Advances in hardware technology have delivered dramatically increased processing speeds, and corresponding hardware and software developments in storage capacities and memory management techniques have facilitated computations on the data representing very large problems. <br> 
Software for linear programming has been under development for many decades, first using Simplex and related techniques and now including interior point implementations, decomposition, and barrier methods, among other advances, all having evolved together into standard forms. One might think that there is little room, or need, for any significant changes in LP solver technology. But with steady advances in processor speed and storage capabilities, computational mathematics, algorithm engineering, potentials for parallel and distributed computing, and powerful and convenient modeling systems that encourage analysts to attack ever larger and more challenging problems, we are seeing even more remarkable developments in software. <br> 
Software vendors typically offer a variety of versions of their packages. The options may be based on the choice of modeling language and the input/output interfaces, the hardware platform and the underlying operating system. Some of these options and characteristics are presented clearly and succinctly in a very useful series of survey articles by (Sharda 1995, 1992) and (Fourer 2015, 2017) that describe many of the most popular software products now available. We mention a few of them here to provide a glimpse of what is currently in use by practitioners who need to solve linear programming problems. <br> 
Many advanced modeling languages and systems, such as those mentioned in **Chapter 1**, provide interfaces with linear programming solvers. For example, AMPL, GAMS, and MPL facilitate linear optimization with advanced features for large-scale problems and parallel simplex methods by offering access to CPLEX, MINOS, and OSL. <br> 
**IBM ILOG CPLEX Optimizer** (commonly referred to as CPLEX) is designed to solve large, difficult linear programming (and other) problems which some other LP solvers cannot solve efficiently. It has been developed to be fast, robust, and reliable, even for poorly scaled or numerically difficult problems. This software uses a modified primal and dual Simplex algorithm, along with interior point methods. CPLEX is currently used to solve some of the largest problems in the world, some with millions of variables, constraints, and non-zeros. Options include a preprocessor for problem reduction, as well as parallel implementations that have demonstrated record-breaking performance. CPLEX is portable across Windows PCs, Unix/Linux, and Mac OS platforms. <br> 
**MINOS** offers numerically stable implementations of primal Simplex, using sparse LU factorization techniques. This system originated with (Murtagh and Saunders 1987) with versions for PCs, Windows, Unix, and mainframe systems. <br> 
**LINDO** (**L**inear **IN**teractive and **D**iscrete **O**ptimizer), originally developed by Linus Schrage (1991), is one of the oldest and now among the most popular commercial systems for solving linear programming problems. **LINDO API** and the **LINGO** modeling system offer powerful solvers for linear programs, based on methods including primal and dual simplex for speed and robust computations. <br> 
**SAS** provides an integrated package, with capabilities for solving a wide variety of Operations Research problems. SAS/OR subroutines for solving linear programming problems use two phase Revised Simplex, primal and dual simplex, and interior point methods, and employ decomposition algorithms and efficient sparse-matrix techniques. <br> 
**Gurobi Optimization** solves linear programming problems through the use of advanced algorithms taking advantage of various modern powerful hardware architectures. <br> 
**IMSL** has an established reputation in the field of numerical problem-solving software, known for accuracy and dependability. IMSL contains literally thousands of mathematical and statistical library routines including linear programming routines based on the Revised Simplex method. Routines are implemented on a wide variety of platforms. <br> 
This selection of commercial software products is by no means exhaustive; we have merely mentioned several representative packages that are in popular use. With new product enhancements constantly under development, our readers should have no trouble finding many additional sources of software for solving linear programming problems.